PRESS OFFICE: Polyoak Packaging Polyoak Packaging is excited to announce its participation at the Propak East Africa trade exhibition in Nairobi, Kenya from 10 to 12 May 2022. The exhibition is finally back after a few years’ absence due to Covid lockdowns. “We are pleased to be able to exhibit at Propak in Kenya again after such a long delay, to explore partnerships in the region to support business recovery and help unlock new opportunities,” says Divan Kleynhans, Sales and Commercial Manager for African Closures at Polyoak. Polyoak Packaging is a leading rigid plastic packaging supplier, specialising in the design and manufacture of blow moulded, injection moulded, compression moulded and thermoformed packaging for the dairy, beverage, food and industrial markets. Established in 1976, this proudly South African company offers excellent customer service through its extensive sales and distribution network across Africa for its plastic tubs, bottles, preforms, closures, buckets and drums. Polyoak is passionate about the environment and committed to taking a leading role as a responsible producer, actively participating with the relevant producer responsibility organisations and being a founding member of the South African Plastics Pact. Polyoak’s plastic packaging is carefully designed and manufactured to be fully recyclable; and is widely recycled in practice into useful new items time and again, in line with circular economy principles. Food and beverage manufacturers in Africa are often located great distances from their source of supply and target markets. Machine parts for packaging lines, including blowers and fillers, along with the technical support that goes with it, are often far away. Capital is also often an issue when wanting to upgrade machinery or convert packing lines. Polyoak is a one-stop shop when it comes to packaging. In addition to its diverse range of plastic tubs, bottles and closures, it also offers assistance with packaging research and design, testing and sometimes machine leasing. Its in-house mould design and manufacturing facility is world-class, enabling fast turnaround times for new product development. Divan Kleynhans adds, “We pay special attention to detail to ensure that we deliver the highest quality of product. Our dedicated microbiology laboratory is also on hand to support customers with microbiological analysis, when required, as part of problem solving, new product development or hygiene surveys.” Analytical services include oxygen transmission rate (OTR) assessment, gas chromatography, carbonation and gas retention testing as well as general problem solving including stereo microscopy, co-ordinate measuring and force testing. Visit Polyoak Packaging on stand B29 to explore its latest innovation. PET Preforms Polyoak’s high quality preforms are manufactured at its internationally accredited plants with high volume capacity. Preforms come in varying colours and weights including 28mm PCO 1881 preforms, as well as 38mm 3-start preforms, available with specialist barrier properties such as oxygen scavengers and UV blockers. Lightweight Closures Polyoak’s new lightweight 28mm 1881 Grip closure with tamper evidence is easy to apply and adds modern convenience to carbonated or non-carbonated beverages. Polyoak will also be showcasing its 38mm Sports Cap and 60mm Industrial Closure, along with its award-winning 28mm and 38mm Fliptop range for sauces and condiments. Advanced Closure Printing Polyoak’s 28mm and 38mm PET closures are available with three-colour offset print decoration for impactful branding; and internal laser marking to enable on-pack promotions and competitions. Tubs and Buckets Polyoak’s specialist tubs division, Dairypack Tubs has been manufacturing dairy packaging for over thirty years. Its manufacturing plants are internationally certified for food safety and raw materials are randomly migration tested to prevent odour and flavour taints. Print decoration only utilises guaranteed approved food grade ink, and the tubs are made from 100% polypropylene (PP) making them fully recyclable. Polyoak offers customised shapes and sizes with built-in tamper-evidence to protect the product inside. Its innovative barrier technology enables the application of tubs for ambient food categories with extended shelf life such as pickled beetroot and mayonnaise. These barrier tubs are able to replace heavier glass and tin packaging and have a lower carbon footprint. Contacts: For closures and PET preforms contact Craig Harmse on [email protected] For tubs, buckets and other contact Natasha Harmse on [email protected] Visit our new website at www.polyoakpackaging.co.za