Rwanda is well positioned to seize a share of the market for passion fruit in Europe, according to a study by Manufacturing Africa in collaboration with various Rwandan government agencies. Demand for passion fruit in European markets is estimated at about 375,300 tonnes per year, which translates to about $861 million. Ghana, Madagascar and South Africa are currently the main African suppliers of passion fruit to Europe. However, according to the study, demand for passion fruit in high-value markets is sufficiently strong to allow for the entry of new producing countries. Rwanda boasts of very low and low slope land, ideal for the production of passion fruits. Purple passion fruits grown in Rwanda are the preferred variety in EU markets. Varieties from Colombia (currently one of the biggest exporters to the EU) are mostly used as puree or juices due to their high acidity while the purple variety grown in Rwanda, Kenya, and South Africa is favoured for fresh consumption. Rwandan passion fruit also has a seasonality advantage during months of light supply in Kenya and South Africa.  The export of fresh passion fruit to the EU can fetch a gross profit margin of 48%, assuming a wholesale price of $4,840/ tonne. The farmgate price is in the region of $700/tonne but driven by a variety of factors including yield, supply volume, and produce quality. Transport costs to the EU are approximately $1,800/tonne if the exporter takes advantage of RwandAir’s subsidised tariffs.  Passion fruit juices can also be processed and exported to European markets from Rwanda at reasonable margins. Passion fruit juice can fetch a gross margin of 32% at a wholesale price of $15,000/tonne. Total production outlay is about $10,000/tonne, while transport costs are in the region of $150/tonne, assuming transport from Kigali to Dar es Salaam by road ($93/tonne) and then to Europe by sea freight ($57/tonne).  According to the study, Rwanda’s competitive advantages to produce high-value crops for premium export markets include: This article summarises findings from a Manufacturing Africa report. Manufacturing Africa is an FCDO funded programme looking to support investment into the manufacturing sector across Kenya, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Uganda, Nigeria and Senegal. For more information about Manufacturing Africa, investment opportunities, or additional sector deep dive studies please consult the website at www.manufacturingafrica.org The production of fresh and processed chilli in Rwanda has the potential to capture significant demand for these products in markets such as the European Union and China. Trends and events during 2018. Here is a selection of potential agribusiness and food opportunities in Africa that came across our desk in 2021. A selection of seven businesspeople who are capitalising on opportunities in Africa's agribusiness and food industry. A list of potential business ideas in Africa to pursue in 2022, from exporting organic food products to tapping into growing global demand for African luxury brands. Packaging, recycling, consumer electronics, agro-processing, and pharmaceuticals highlighted as attractive opportunities.