There is an unmet and growing demand for packaging products in Ethiopia, according to a recent study by Manufacturing Africa, a programme funded by the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) that supports investment into the manufacturing sector. Ethiopia will have a packaging manufacturing opportunity worth $971 million by 2030, with more than 50% of the potential lying in packaging for the food and beverage sectors. About 20% of packaging is imported in the country, which is highly inefficient for consumer goods companies. Opportunities exist across Ethiopia’s packaging value chain, particularly in manufacturing of paper/plastic intermediate inputs and recycling. Ethiopia’s manufacturing output doubled in over the past five years and is expected to expand at 13% annually. The fast-growing agro-processing industry is a major consumer of packaging. The food and drinks sector collectively represent about half of total demand for packaging (about $333 million of $649 million).  There are an estimated 59 companies producing packaging in Ethiopia, focusing mainly on paper and plastics.  Almost all packaging manufacturing takes place in the vicinity of Addis Ababa and outside industrial parks. Several industrial zones now under review/development are being located next to existing packaging players and could become sources of additional demand. The study highlights the following 12 investment opportunities in Ethiopia’s packaging sector: PLASTIC 1. Secure supply of PET bottles to domestic market – opportunity ranging from blow-moulding to end-to-end production Rigid plastic is one of top substrates currently and in terms of expected growth, with several agro-processors (e.g. in fruit juices and edible oils) resorting mostly to imports. Market opportunity by 2030: $95 million Investment required: $20 million 2. Secure supply of flexible plastic packaging Growing popularity of type of packaging with limited local offer in terms of quantity and quality that could be used for key export commodities. Market opportunity by 2030: $200 million Investment required: $35 million 3. Set up cutting plant for tubes for toothpaste Consumer goods manufacturers are importing toothpaste tubes at a high premium. Market opportunity by 2030: $8 million Investment required: TBD 4. Incentivise production of bio-plastics from sugar cane to reduce environmental impact of plastic use Increasing global pressure to shift from traditional plastic to alternative materials, as well as increasing global demand for eco-friendly packaging due to awareness, esp. in Europe and USA. Ethiopia’s large sugar production can supply sugar cane waste to produce plastic. Market opportunity by 2030: <$120 million Investment required: TBD 5. Boost production of recycled plastic to replace imports for local producers to use as feedstock or for gasification (fuel) All raw materials for plastic production are imported currently, yet both rigid and flexible plastics are highly consumed locally, ensuring sufficient supply of feedstock for the recycling process. Market opportunity by 2030: $30 million Investment required: $25 million 6. Recycle PET plastic to converted polyester fibre for textile sector Add value to exported PET flakes and provide raw materials to the textile sector by converting plastic to polyester fibre. Market opportunity by 2030: $30-40 million Investment required: $75-90 million PAPER 7. Set up liquid carton converting hub Growing presence of product in Africa by Tetrapak, which could be looking for other African countries which are well connected to set-up as hubs. Market opportunity by 2030: $140 million Investment required: TBD 8. Set up supply of forest-certified bamboo wood pulp for paper packaging producers Increasing demand for eco-packaging due to consumer awareness and preferences, particularly in Europe and North America, that could be served by large local supply of bamboo that is easy to ship in the pulp form. Market opportunity by 2030: export Investment required: Up to $2 billion 9. Development of local production of corrugated paper – opportunity ranging from local cutting of imported corrugated paper, to boost of end-to-end production Demand for corrugated paper across all key industries with local supply being limited in quality and quantity. Market opportunity by 2030: $70 million Investment required: $38 million 10. Boost paper recycling to replace imports for local producers to use as feedstock Only few local players have access to locally produced feedstock while others face difficult importing processes, harming their competitiveness. Market opportunity by 2030: $40 million Investment required: $10-20 million METAL 11. Increase metal cans production for food and beverage segment There is currently only one local player providing metal cans with fast growing demand. Market opportunity by 2030: $70 million Investment required: $25 million GLASS 12. Increase glass packaging production for beverages Local demand is being satisfied with expensive and inefficient imports. Market opportunity by 2030: $70 million Investment required: $120 million 1. Produce pre-form bottles and other rigid plastics Imported PET pre-forms and other rigid plastic packaging amounted to about $70 million in 2019 showing there is an opportunity for new companies to fill the gap. Opportunity: About $205 million by 2030 Other sources of value: PET and HDPE are relatively easy to recycle and Ethiopia has low levels of recycling with most of the solid waste ending up in landfills. Key product: PET bottles; HDPE bottles Key enablers:  Key assumptions: Capital requirements: 2. Increase local production of flexible plastic packaging Flexible plastics like pouches are gaining popularity as less material is required to package goods. This popularity can gain further momentum as the packaged food industry in Ethiopia is set to grow 1.7% p.a. between 2019 and 2024. Most of the volume growth will come from biscuits (3.2% p.a.), cereals (3.1% p.a.) and rice and pasta (2.6% p.a.) – all suitable candidates for flexible plastic packaging. Imported flexible packaging amounted to about $76 million in 2019 showing there is an opportunity for new companies to fill the gap. This opportunity could enable exporters within the agro-processing industry meet the quality requirements from global markets and become more competitive. Key product: Wrap film; pouches; cutter box and case ready film Key enablers:  Key assumptions: Capital intensity: 3. Set up bamboo pulp production (and additional bamboo products) Ethiopia was the ninth largest exporter of bamboo raw materials in 2015, holding 3% of the global stock of bamboo with 1.4 million hectares, but only 0.02% of the international trade. Bamboo is regarded as environmentally friendly and its rising popularity makes it an option for several end-uses such as personal care (e.g. tissues). The Government of Ethiopia plans to promote expansion of the national stock of bamboo to 1.6 million hectares by 2030 (about 14%). Bamboo pulp could be a competitive product as it is easily shipped to global markets with demand. Key product:  Key assumptions: Capital intensity: Key enablers to materialise the opportunity: This article summarises findings from a Manufacturing Africa report. Manufacturing Africa is an FCDO funded programme looking to support investment into the manufacturing sector across Kenya, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Uganda, Nigeria and Senegal.  Packaging, recycling, consumer electronics, agro-processing, and pharmaceuticals highlighted as attractive opportunities. "In Ethiopia, there are 105 million people who will need basic consumables such as food, personal care items and healthcare services," says investor Ashenafi Alemu. With a growing horticulture industry, there is a captive market of companies that currently import all of their packaging material. Every year, Ethiopia imports billions of dollars of goods that can theoretically be manufactured locally. A selection of potential business opportunities that came across our desk in Q3 2021. In several southern and east African countries, there is a shortage of quality, locally-produced packaging material, which means companies often have to rely on imports or settle for subpar solutions.