Investment in mushroom production in Rwanda could capture significant demand in high-value export markets, says a study by Manufacturing Africa in collaboration with various Rwandan government agencies. Demand for imported mushrooms is strong in the European Union (EU) and the Middle East. The imported mushroom market in Europe is estimated at about 323,000 tonnes per year, which translates to about $699 million, while the Middle East requires 18,500 tonnes (valued at $100 milllion). The most imported type of mushroom in Europe is the Chinese shiitake mushroom. The African continent, too, is a market prospective producers should consider, with the region consuming about 1,800 tonnes of imported mushrooms annually, valued at $5 million. Rwanda is well positioned to produce and export mushrooms to these markets, according to the study. Agronomic conditions in Rwanda are ideal for the cultivation of several varieties of mushrooms, including specialty mushrooms such as shiitake. Specialty mushrooms, both fresh and dried, present a particularly attractive opportunity as wholesale prices can go up to $12,000/tonne for fresh and $38,000/tonne for dried. The export of fresh shiitake mushrooms from Rwanda to the EU can fetch a gross profit margin of 18%, assuming a wholesale price of $12,000/tonne. Production expenses are estimated at $8,000/tonne, while transport costs to the EU are approximately $1,800/tonne if the exporter takes advantage of RwandAir’s subsidised tariffs.  Dried shiitake mushrooms can also be exported to the EU at reasonable margins of about 18%, at a wholesale price of $21,000. The cost to produce shiitake mushrooms in Rwanda is about $17,000/tonne, while transport outlays are in the region of $150/tonne, assuming transport from Kigali to Dar es Salaam by road ($93/tonne) and then to Europe by sea freight ($57 tonne).  According to the study, Rwanda’s competitive advantages to produce high-value crops for premium export markets include: This article summarises findings from a Manufacturing Africa report. Manufacturing Africa is an FCDO funded programme looking to support investment into the manufacturing sector across Kenya, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Uganda, Nigeria and Senegal. For more information about Manufacturing Africa, investment opportunities, or additional sector deep dive studies please consult the website at www.manufacturingafrica.org How entrepreneur Laurent Demuynck built a mushroom farming company. Demand for passion fruit in European markets is estimated at about 375,300 tonnes per year, which translates to about $861 million. The production of fresh and processed chilli in Rwanda has the potential to capture significant demand for these products in markets such as the European Union and China. Here is a selection of potential agribusiness and food opportunities in Africa that came across our desk in 2021. “I believe there is a future for good quality, organic and intensive horticulture in Rwanda,” says businessman Laurent Demuynck. From mushrooms to superfood moringa to seeds for smallholder farmers, here is a selection of businesspeople capitalising on the sector’s potential.