Press Office: Zayed Sustainability Prize Africa is steadily making progress in promoting technological advancement and innovation by finding creative ways to solve local problems. Creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship are vital elements for socio-economic transformation. New businesses are springing up across the continent, providing unique solutions to pressing challenges, strengthening the continent’s competitive capabilities and its efforts to diversify its economy. Innovation in Africa is often hindered by a lack of access to funds, strong governance and regulatory structures, business support, mentorship, skills and adequate infrastructure. Despite these challenges, which were exacerbated by the harsh impact of the global pandemic, notable innovations continue to arise from Africa. Innovators defy the odds to prove that technology is Africa’s ‘diamond in the rough’ and is worthy of the world’s attention. Some organisations, including the Zayed Sustainability Prize, are supporting the sustainable solutions being developed within the continent and beyond. The Zayed Sustainability Prize is the UAE’s pioneering global award for rewarding impact, innovation, and inspiration. It recognises innovators and visionaries who are committed to accelerating impactful sustainable solutions across five distinct categories: Health, Food, Energy, Water and Global High Schools. Inspired by the sustainable development and humanitarian legacy of the UAE’s founding father, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, the Prize has awarded 96 winners whose solutions or school projects have directly and indirectly positively transformed the lives of more than 370 million people to date. The Prize’s US$3 million fund offers winners US$600,000 to develop their solutions across Health, Food, Water and Energy. The Global High Schools category is split into six world region winners, with each school being able to claim up to US$100,000 to implement their sustainability project. While the submission forms vary per category, core elements of each entry lie in the innovative ways in which technology, applications and solutions are driving positive changes in people’s lives. For the Health, Food, Energy, and Water categories, organisations should demonstrate that they are providing access to essential products or services and have a long-term vision for improved living and working conditions. The Global High Schools category projects should be student-led, with emphasis placed on the students being actively involved in the planning, implementation, and monitoring processes. Since its inception in 2008, the Prize has recognised a number of African businesses, non-profits and high schools. One striking trait among these winners is their burning drive to impact their communities, countries and ultimately the continent. The Prize continues to highlight the tremendous contributions of non-profit organisations (NPOs) and small and medium sized enterprises (SME’s), many of which became winners in the categories of Health, Food, Water and Energy, including: Likewise, the Global High School category has also witnessed sustainable solutions across Health, Food, Energy and Water such as: We Care Solar, the US-based provider of efficient solar energy systems to health facilities in off-grid regions, is transforming maternal and neonatal outcomes in health facilities throughout Africa with its portable maternity and medical “Solar Suitcase”. The obstetric Solar Suitcase has made an impact on the health and safety outcomes of millions of women and children. Over 7,100 health facilities in more than 20 countries have been equipped with these solar suitcases that offer medical quality lighting, fetal monitors, solar panels to charge an LFP battery for mobile phones and small devices, mounting hardware, and headlamps with rechargeable batteries. Their programs have also empowered more than 30,000 health workers and improved their capacity to manage deliveries. As the 2019 winner in the Health category, We Care Solar is using solar and sustainable energy technologies to provide safe, reliable, and affordable solutions to the global challenge of maternal and new-born mortality. Sanku has built a model that incentivises small-scale flour millers to fortify their flour with micronutrients. Sanku provides fortification technology to these millers, enabling them to fortify flour, helping to improve the health of consumers and boosting sales for the millers. They are currently working with over 650 millers and aim to reach 3,000 within the next few years, while they have reached a total of 3 million people through their solution to-date. Most of their operations are in Tanzania, but they do have partner projects in Kenya, Rwanda and Malawi. Sanku is the 2019 winner of the Zayed Sustainability Prize in the Food category. The 2023 edition is now open to innovators across Africa, spanning small to medium enterprises (SMEs), non-profit organisations, and high schools, with sustainable solutions in the categories of Health, Food, Energy, Water and Global High Schools. Apply today by visiting www.zayedsustainabilityprize.com – deadline 6 July 2022. SME’s and non-profits must enter an existing sustainability solution in one of the Health, Food, Energy, or Water categories. The Global High Schools category invites student-led projects or proposals, based on one or more of the four aforementioned sustainability sectors.